# Introduction to Group Theory: An Activity-Based Approach

After several attempts to pack groups plus a little taste of rings and fields into a one-semester abstract algebra course, I finally made peace with the fact that I couldn't cover such a breadth of topics without racing toward the finish line, trying to convince myself that I could indeed offer a meaningful introduction to rings in the last week-and-a-half.  This approach burns students (and the professor) out, and there's about a 0.5% chance that anything covered during that last frenzied sprint will be retained.

A much better approach, it seems to me, is to make sure the students learn how to take a deep dive into just one type of algebraic structure, namely groups.  Even if they leave the course never having heard of rings, they'll be much better equipped to explore them when they do.  This slow-but-steady introduction to abstract algebra via groups means that there will be more time spent working on activities in class and more time learning how to write good proofs.  It's a commitment to these two learning paths that informs the unique features of this book.  

There are dozens and dozens of in-class activities dispersed throughout that are meant to either reinforce a point in the text or to develop a key idea through a series of leading questions.  Also, most chapters conclude with sections on proof techniques that will be used often in the course.  Students who use this book will be encouraged to learn actively and write clearly.  They will learn how to _do_ abstract algebra.

The topics covered are standard in an introductory group theory course.  The notion of a group is introduced in Chapter 1 by first considering symmetries of plane figures.  This sets the tone for the entire course, instilling the idea that groups are mathematical objects whose primary reason for being is to help organize our thoughts about symmetry.  Groups are defined axiomatically in Chapter 2, and we see there how to deduce theorems from axioms.  Chapter 3 arms the students with several specific examples of groups before proceeding to more theory, particularly those realized as number systems and sets of matrices.  Chapter 4 introduces subgroups and element order.  It also contains just enough content to prove Lagrange's Theorem.  The symmetric and alternating groups are defined in Chapter 5, at which point we have a good cross-section of examples of groups with which to proceed with our introduction to group theory.  Chapter 6 covers the all-important notion of an isomorphism and strives to deliver an intuitive way to think about the topic.  Chapter 7 states and proves the Classification of Cyclic Groups and uses this classification to work out some important theorems.  Chapter 8 introduces direct products of groups with the express purpose of stating the Classification of Finite Abelian Groups.  This famous theorem is not proved here, but we show how powerful a result it really is.  The last two chapters explore quotient groups, a notoriously hard subject for students to digest their first time through.  Quotient groups are covered at a very deliberate pace with several examples that serve to make them more palatable.  Chapter 10 ends with a fun look at the Classification of Finite Simple Groups.
